[Standards, Options and Recommendations (SOR) for good practices in dentistry for head and neck cancer patients. Federation of the French Cancer Centres (FNCLCC)].
CONTEXT:
The Standards, Options and Recommendations (SOR), initiated in 1993, is a collaborative project between the Federation of the French Cancer Centres (FNCLCC), the 20 French Cancer Centres and specialists from French Public Universities, General Hospitals and Private Clinics. The main objective is the development of clinical practice guidelines to improve the quality of health care and outcomes for cancer patients. The methodology is based on literature review and critical appraisal by a multidisciplinary experts group, with feedback from specialists in cancer care delivery.
OBJECTIVES:
To develop clinical practice guidelines for dentistry and oral hygiene in head and neck cancer patients.
METHODS:
Data have been identified by literature search using Medline (up to January 1999) and personal reference lists. The main end points considered were risk factors for treatment related late effects, safety and quality of life, efficacy of dental preventative measures and treatment. Once the guidelines were defined, the document was submitted to reviewers for peer review and to the medical committees of the 20 French Cancer Centres for review and agreement.
RESULTS:
The key recommendations are: 1) before receiving radiotherapy, surgery and chemotherapy for head and neck cancer, patients must benefit from a multidisciplinary approach including dental evaluation; 2) the patients must be informed of precautions and educated about oral hygiene; 3) after radiotherapy, the most important dental late effect to prevent is radionecrosis, in accordance with the oral and dental state, the dentist may propose conservation or extraction of teeth, fluoridation and regular follow-up; 4) during chemotherapy, the principal complications are mucositis, haemorrhage and infection risk; 5) after surgery, the dentist may propose prosthetic measures with the aim functional, aesthetic and psychological benefit; 6) in the particular case of children, treatment and prevention are the same as for adults but the follow-up is specific because of the dental development.
