Molecular cloning of a novel calcium-binding protein in the secreted saliva of the green rice leafhopper Nephotettix cincticeps.
Green rice leafhoppers (Nephotettix cincticeps) secrete watery and coagulable saliva in the feeding process. In our study, the watery salivary secretion was concentrated by ultrafiltration from "fed diet" and subjected to SDS-PAGE. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of the most predominant band at 84 kDa (designated NcSP84) was analyzed by Edman degradation. This sequence was completely consistent with the most abundant protein in the salivary gland extracts, which was separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Based on the N-terminal amino acid sequence, the complete cDNA of this protein was cloned by 5'- and 3'-RACE using degenerate primers. The deduced NcSP84 contained an open reading frame of 2061 bp encoding a putative 687 amino acids with a putative signal sequence composed of 19 amino acids. The nucleotide and amino acid sequences of NcSP84 did not share statistically significant homology with any sequences in public databases. Motif search predicted that this protein had EF-hands, the most common motif found in Ca(2+) -binding proteins. As predicted, NcSP84 exhibited Ca(2+)-binding activity. The SDS-PAGE mobility of purified NcSP84 bound to Ca(2+) tended to decline discretely, depending on the concentration of CaCl(2) with which it was mixed for 1h before adding SDS buffer. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry showed that the NcSP84 gene and gene product were expressed and stored in type III cells, which are the largest lobes in the primary salivary glands. The NcSP84 protein was detected in the phloem sap of rice exposed to leafhoppers, verifying that the NcSP84 protein was injected into the sieve tubes. These results suggest that NcSP84 could be secreted into the sieve tubes during feeding, which might bind Ca(2+) ions that flow into sieve tubes in response to stylet puncturing. This might suppress sieve-element clogging and facilitate continuous ingestion from sieve tubes.
